Welcome back.
In this lecture, we're gonna start with another
small project in order to learn about the difference
between implicit and explicit grids.
So again we start from an empty code line here
and start by writing some markup.
Okay, again I'm using Emmet here
and call these items just item, and then item,
and then the number such as I showed you before.
Okay, and this time we want eight items
and so I just multiple all of this by eight,
hit Tab, and here we go,
so item one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight.
Now let's actually add some content here this time
like a sentence like Modern, CSS,
with, Flexbox,
and, Grid, is, great,
so that it's a bit different
and not always with the numbers.
Okay, now some styles and this is the same as usual.
Let's say 1000 pixels here again,
and let's give it a background color here as well.
So we'll select gray color again.
And since we're here, we can also already
style the items here.
And of course, we use a nested selector here.
We could also do this outside of the container,
but it's no problem because the item
is actually inside of the container, right.
So just padding, let's say 20 pixels.
Text color should be white.
So I could actually copy this here
from the other example as well
but also it's very quick.
All right, so that is the quick setup
for this small project, this small demo.
Let's now add some grid tracks here,
and starting with the row,
so grid-template-rows.
And what I want to do now is to only
add two rows and two columns, okay
so that I can show you the difference
between explicit and implicit grids.
So these rows they will have a height of 150 pixels.
So two rows with 150 pixels each, and then two columns,
and grid-template-columns.
And I want two columns with the exact same width
occupying the entire container.
You already know how to do that, right,
so as they repeat to one fractional unit, and that's it.
And actually I could have done the same up here.
So actually why not,
so using the repeat function again.
And now just to see what's going on here,
let's also add a gap,
so grid-gap 30 pixels.
Oh, and again I forgot to set the display property here
to two grid,
and so now we'll see what's going on.
All right, so we have our grid now here
with these four cells here that we defined.
So we defined a two by two grid, remember,
which is only four cells.
But then down here, we have the other four cells, right,
because we have actually eight items.
And this has actually happened in our other project
right at the beginning of the section,
and I told about it then that we were gonna come back
to it later, and so now it's that time
where we're gonna talk about that.
So these four grid cells that we defined here
in the beginning which are now occupied by these
four grid items here, this is the so called explicit grid
because we explicitly defined how these rows
and these columns should look like.
Okay, so again this part of the grid is the explicit grid.
Let's actually inspect this here again.
Okay, and so you can see it here as well.
So these four here, this part of the grid
is our explicit grid.
Now if we have more grid items than we have space,
well, then CSS grid automatically
adds some more tracks to the grid
so that we can then fit all of these remaining items.
And that's what happened here.
So you see that down here these four,
these are two row tracks that were added.
So this track here and this track, they were added
to our grid in order to fit the remaining four grid items.
And this part of the grid then, these four here,
this is called the implicit grid.
Okay, does that make sense?
So again the first part of the grid,
the part that we actually defined in our code
is the explicit grid.
So it's this part here defined by these template rows
and template columns,
okay, so these tracks that we added here.
And then the part that is automatically added
in order to fit the content that doesn't fit
in our explicit grid, CSS adds the implicit grid after that.
Okay, now what if we wanted to somehow style
this part of the grid, so the implicit grid?
Well, in fact we can because there is a property for that.
So let's say we want these row tracks here
actually to have a defined height.
And we can easily do that by using
grid-auto-rows.
Okay and so now we can say that we want
like 80 pixels, for example,
and that's what it does.
So now these two automatically added tracks,
this one and this one, they have a height of 80 pixels.
So let's actually inspect that.
So Inspect Element, and yeah, so you can see it here
that it has a height of 80 pixels, right.
And the same goes, of course, for this one,
80, 80, 80 here, and then the explicit grid
that we defined you can see here that they have
a height of 150 pixels, so perfect.
Actually here in this grid inspector,
the implicit and explicit grids, they look a bit different.
So you see here that this solid line here
goes around the explicit grid.
Do you see that?
So the solid line it actually ends here, right,
and so down here there's no solid line like we have here.
So the solid line here is basically the end
of the explicit grid.
And then also the grid lines in the explicit grid
they are just dashed while in the implicit grid
they are dotted like you can see here.
I'm not sure if you can see it maybe in the video
but I'm sure that in your inspector,
if you open the dev tools like this,
you will see it as well.
Okay, so this is just a small subtle difference here
in the dev tools.
So again you see that either lines are dotted like this
for the implicit grid, and up here they are dashed.
Okay, so just a small subtle difference.
Now you may ask why are these additional grid items
that we cannot fit into our explicit grid
added as rows and not as columns?
Well, that is a great question actually,
so let me answer it to you.
It's because of a simple small property
that is called grid-auto-flow.
Okay, and this property is by default set to row,
but we can also set it to column.
And check out what happens now.
So you see, the remaining items are now no longer
added as rows but as columns
because we told our grid to flow as columns.
So you also see that there is a difference in the way
that these items are placed.
So before we had Modern, CSS with Flexbox,
but now we have Modern then CSS down here with Flexbox.
And so what this means is that the automatic placement
algorithm now places these items in order to fill up
the columns and no longer the rows.
So if we set this to row, then you will see
that the algorithm automatically
places these items in two rows,
so Modern, CSS with Flexbox, right.
And back to column, then it's Modern, and then down CSS,
with Flexbox and, and CSS is great.
Okay, now if we added more and more grid items here,
then we add it as new columns.
Now of course, if we can style the rows
that are automatically added,
we can do the same for the columns.
So grid-auto-columns, and let's say we want these
to be a half fractional unit, so .5fr
and so that will be half of the width
of the other ones here.
Okay, so let's check it out.
So this one has a width of 303 pixels,
and so the other ones should have approximately 150, 151,
now so 151.667.
Okay, make sense?
That's because, of course, half fr is half
of one fractional unit, right.
So you'll see that basically this grid-auto-columns here
only applies as soon as we set auto-flow to column
and then this auto-rows here for the automatically
placed rows is not really relevant.
Okay, so that is the difference between explicit
and implicit grids.
So you see that it's actually not a problem at all,
so if we have more items then we can fit in the grid
that we defined initially.
This implicit grid and the ability
to style these additional rows and columns is great
for use cases where you don't really know how many rows
or columns there will be in your grid, in your layout.
For example, if you have an Apex call in like some web app
or something where you can load data from a server
while the page is loading and you don't really know
if there are 10 items or 12 or 15 or 20,
so if you don't know how many there are,
you can simply style these automatically added rows
or columns and then everything is gonna work
as you expected.
So you can control how the grid will look like
even if you don't know how many items there will be in it.